Who do I blame for my misfortunes? Upon whom does the weight of my tragedies, my hardships, my losses lay? Is it me? Is it God? Is it my parents? Is it this society? Whose shoulder carries the stain of guilt for all my suffering? A question that haunts my thoughts, ever unwilling to release its grip on me.

Firstly, I think that suffering is something that cannot be measured. If a person is dying from hunger and another is suffering from depression, certainly, we are inclined to say that one man's suffering is many magnitudes greater than the other's. But while we should acknowledge that some ailments are more bearable than others, this attitude often belittles the other person's suffering.

Sapiens are the only animals capable of suicide. Where do you think this capability might come from? This, in fact, goes against evolution, whose sole purpose is survival. Through collateral damage or who knows what, we were cursed with sentience. This thought backfired as an unintended consequence for evolution because a mind this big was capable of a new form of suffering, which had little to do with physical pain.

The mind asked questions. It was curious. It wanted to know. It solved problems. It soon solved the biggest problem: survival. The vessel which it controlled was now no longer hunted by other lesser minds. It soon conquered enemies too small to even see. It gathered more food than it needed for the vessel to survive. After all these little matters had been resolved, it began to think. How was he created? The mind, seeing itself as extraordinary, believed it could only be the handiwork of a superior being, sent here for a particular purpose. Sometimes that purpose was to conquer all land that could be conquered. At times, it may also seek to instill in its kin a belief in that very purpose. Yet, the mind was too proud to think that perhaps there was no grand purpose, no benevolent being in the sky, no life after this one, and that it might very well be alone. Even so, one cannot blame the mind, as it was just an infant; it had just started thinking.

Through these magnificent delusions, it erected a facade, convinced that its existence held more meaning than just the survival of its own body. This worked well enough, for some time at least. But a lie can only go so far. It soon realized that it was only deceiving itself, saving itself, in fact, from the unknown, from oblivion. The mind realized that there might not be any reason behind its creation. Its emergence into consciousness might have been nothing but a random occurrence, a mistake—nothing more, nothing less. This revelation was disastrous for the mind; as its illusions crumbled, it was forced to face an unyielding reality. Sometimes it slipped into denial; at other times, it accepted this meaninglessness. However, the suffering it experienced grew unbearable, leading it to consider ending its own existence instead of confronting the truth. Only seldom do we find it embracing this absurd reality.

Another thing the mind did to extinguish the fire within itself was slavery. It became hedonistic, escapist. Sometimes it became a slave of religion, sometimes offspring of its vessel, sometimes substances, sometimes to the pleasures of the flesh. Almost every time, it remained drunk on something: family, children, drugs, money, power, etc. But the pursuit of these things only offered escape from the demons it faced down. To say that it lessened its suffering would be a lie.

So to regard the suffering of this mind as inferior to physical pain would be a profound injustice. Every animal suffers physically, some suffer mentally as well, but none compare to the suffering that the sapiens' mind can cause itself. A cat does not question its existence; its only raison d'être is survival. Is its existence any lesser than our own? Most certainly not. We can only conclude that the existence of all animals is distinct, not that one is better or worse than the other. Fundamentally, an individual's suffering is the cost incurred for the advantages that accompany such an intellect. This mind has tamed its surroundings, conquered every other species, causing the extinction of many as collateral damage from its expansion. This is the price that every human being must pay in order to enjoy this benefit.

Now, if I turn my focus to the individual—myself. I am compelled to revisit the question: who is responsible for my suffering? There are those who argue that suffering has no form beyond the mental realm and, as such, should not be something we expend effort on eliminating. Buddha might suggest that one should let go of the desire for happiness, let go of the desire, and the pain will go away with it. Suffering and happiness are a part of human life; to end suffering, one must end life itself. While I would concede to this point, it does not address my true concern. I am not inquiring how to rid myself of suffering; I wish to hold the person responsible for my pain accountable.

Do I blame my parents? I do not think so. By bringing me to life, they were, in fact, trying to lessen their own suffering. Another curse that evolution has blessed humanity with is love for its offspring. Human offspring are very hard to take care of, so evolution had to think of something clever to overcome this hurdle. So it came up first with empathy, then with love. The love was so strong, in fact, that again, it backfired. Parents would prioritize the life of their offspring over their own. So, in fact, my parents just adopted slavery to their children. They made them the purpose of their life, and if I were to be honest, my life would have consisted of much, much more suffering if it were not for their presence.

Then do I blame society? I think society has a very big role to play in the life of everyone. Some societies are better off at the expense of another, e.g., the West at the expense of the East, and thus the West has better to offer to its citizens. But I think there is not much difference in the suffering of an individual unless, of course, you are a slave. In subtle and profound ways, society can add to your suffering or take away from it. But then again, most of the things that a society can do is reduce physical pain. Now, you can argue that it can also have a mental impact, such as depression, to which I would say you are right, but depression is often just the mind's response to repeated trauma. It is just an evolutionary mechanism to deal with problems that are often unsolvable—nothing more.

And yes, I won't leave the biggest contender. Is God responsible for my suffering? For this case, we will assume he does exist. But then in what capacity? Is he omnipotent? If yes, then why not take away all my suffering at once? Is he omniscient? If yes, then do I even have free will, or is everything written in advance for me? Is he benevolent? If yes, then why does he not take away my suffering? It's either because he is omnibenevolent but not omnipotent, or omnipotent but a sadist. And yes, an omnipotent and omniscient being can surely come up with ways of judging humans other than inflicting suffering on them. Is he then responsible? He surely is the easiest to blame, just because he is the most powerful on the list. Yet, with all that power, he does nothing. Did he just create me out of boredom, or did I create him out of fear? Alas, I might never know. And I don't think there is anything to know.

At my lowest, I have desperately wanted someone to blame, to pinpoint someone who sabotaged me every step of the way. And believe me when I say it is so easy to pin all the blame on him and just accept that it was never in your hands to begin with. But time and again, whenever I have looked deep enough, I have never found anyone but me.

My brother asked me the other day:

"Do you believe in God?"

"Yes, but only when I write. I need someone to blame."

"Do you believe in God?"

"Yes, but only when I see blood spill. I need someone to loathe."

"Do you believe in God?"

"Yes, I do, but only when I feel so much joy I put him to shame."

"Do you believe in God?" he asked.

"Who? Someone pure? Complete? Perfect? Holy without question and cruel without debate? Yes. Yes, I do."

Then another question was asked, but not by my brother:

"Tell me, how do you look to the sky with hope when the ground below you is on fire?"

A voice rang out. "Is it because there is nowhere else to look?"